Speaker 1  0:01  
Hey, welcome to the good faith podcast. This is Kingsley Uche. The following is part two of my conversation with my co host, Patrick Afikpo on the subject of the manosphere. This conversation was recorded one week after the first conversation, which was released last week. Meticulous listeners would have noticed that we didn't cover some of the topics outlined in the introduction to that episode, specifically the question of whether the afami concept regularly employed in red Pete discourse has any basis in reality, as well as the issue of the appropriation of stoicism within the community. We also attempt to spell out why the gender war is detrimental to society and humanity in general. All of that and more are covered in this episode. So without further ado, I bring you the concluding part of our discussion on the manosphere. You

Speaker 2  1:12  
the last week, we went into the subject of the manosphere and the history and all that. And it was just so deep and so broad that I just thought that maybe we should just continue until, until we exhaust it. If that's possible, then we did not really touch on the broader effect of the manosphere on society, because,

Unknown Speaker  1:41  
because we can see that some of these

Speaker 2  1:46  
worldviews from the manosphere have spilled into society, and they're kind of kind of like normalized and some people may even espouse those views and not understand where they came from. You know, that's, that's the impact that the manosphere has had on society. And we're talking about views like, like, in dating and gender dynamics, you have a views like, like, the high value man, high value woman. Language, high value man needs to get a high value woman. And you know, stuff like that. They're just just not realistic and applicable in real life. Then hypergamy and the SMV, SMV sexual market value and hypergamy, the notion that women tend to marry up. We get we notice this in society, but it's not hard and fast rule. But these are not things that happen all the time. Other views, like nice guys finish last. You know, we know what that means. All of this, all of those talking points within the manosphere that are now are now normalized in society, then you have like this, the sigma mill archetype. This one is about masculinity and improvements, sigma mill, alpha male, the alpha male concept, which is based on a myth that wolves move in packs and then they have like the they have like the leader, who calls, who makes, who gives the orders and calls the shots. We know this is a myth. It's not true, but we use those examples in like in within the manosphere, that's what that's does. Those are the kind of examples they use. And it has now. It's now normalized within society, and then the grind and hustle culture, stoicism, and you have to not show emotions as a man, and all of those things. I think we apply some of these, some of these philosophies, to themselves. You know, pick them randomly and then apply them and improve their their lives. But also, there is always a tendency for these, these views, to become toxic to the individual. And I think if you look at society broadly speaking, that is what we are witnessing now, the negative, the toxic effect of the manosphere. And we also have other views, like negative attitudes towards feminism and gender roles and online culture and language, the red pill, the matrix. Simp, better meal. Sim, we know. We know, like at least this one we see, we see it almost every day on social media. Don't be a sim. We don't do the same. Does that? You know, men are men are scared to come out and speak freely about their relationships because of the fear of being tagged the same, which is just like a slaw. The body count is cause and all that. So it seems to me that now, the manosphere can be seen as like a manifestation of of modern, western male angst. You know, we touched a bit about what is going on in the west now, with with the male, where it seems like masculinity is collapsing, and there's a there's a crisis of is a. Male crisis going on there the

Unknown Speaker  5:03  
ideological and emotional I'm sorry.

Speaker 3  5:05  
I think it will be helpful if we can just give like a recap one of the conversation of last week, so it can help us to direct this conversation. Okay, last week

Speaker 2  5:19  
we went into, we went into a discussion on the manosphere. We went into the history, the history of the manosphere, and and some popular figures like Tom you. You were the one who mentioned him, Tomaso and Will Farrell and Andrew Tate, and then Kevin Samuels and and then we went also went into the whole movement that was started

Unknown Speaker  5:50  
male, the male's right movement,

Speaker 2  5:53  
and and the talking points that emerged from there, and how those talking points became

Unknown Speaker  6:04  
part of the manosphere.

Speaker 2  6:05  
Think that's basically what we did last year, last last time, last week, Wednesday. And one thing that we did I found really, really helpful, was that we consulted material life, we went online, and then we checked you sent you sent me the link, and I followed it. And we are looking at the the

Unknown Speaker  6:27  
males right movement, and all of the, all of the

Unknown Speaker  6:34  
discussions that you know, go on there.

Speaker 2  6:39  
So that's what we did last week, basically. But, you know, I just condensed them into, sort of, like bullet points. But these were very broad. These were things that we discussed and we went in depth into,

Unknown Speaker  6:51  
yeah, sure, that's helpful.

Speaker 3  6:54  
I'll just add, I'll just add something, because our conversation last week we had, like, there was at the beginning. So the beginning of the conversation, it was like there was a slide besides, yeah,

Unknown Speaker  7:06  
yeah, yeah. There was Yeah, where we were

Speaker 3  7:09  
trying to I was trying to delineate, or differentiate between those groups. So I'll just say something about that for clarification purposes. So basically what I was, what I was trying to do there was that, as you said, the the broader umbrella is what is known as the manosphere, right? Manosphere, yeah, yeah. So now, under this manosphere, they have different groups. We talked about the INCEL community then, yeah, we talked about the LP community, yeah, and the other movement, like the men going their own way and all that. Right? So these are, like, different groups under this Mano say is just like a broad theory, but it's just like when you have, like, you say religion, and then under religion you have Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, those kind of a thing. So what I was trying to explain there was that, okay, fine, like, the same way that there can be overlap within different religion, there can be similar beliefs that most religion who understand, but at the same time, that does not necessarily mean that all the religions are the same, are the same because of those overlap, right? So I was trying to make the difference between the inside community and then the other community, where you can put somebody like Andrew Tate in. Yeah, yeah. Remember I was arguing that I don't think entities can be classified, and I think we agreed on this as an insult. Yeah, yeah, exactly. So that in cell community, I talked about how the insect community are like the the black pillars, right? They have this doom and gloom towards you, and there's what we call biological determinism. You understand, okay, this is our lot, which is, there's nothing we can do about it. All we have to do just, just react in violence or whatever. Then the other community are the ones who are like, whoa. We can, we can do something about this. There are things that you can do as a as a young woman, to improve yourself, to give yourself a better chance on the market. So I think that's a very helpful distinction to have in mind. Yeah, so that to avoid just slumping. Everybody say, Manos say, Yeah. Everybody like these people at the same time. This is something the mistake that many people do when, especially the tractors of this, of the windows and general, they, they tend, tend to lump all of them together, as if they are all. They all have the same, same belief. You understand why they are like I said, there may be overlap. There might something they. Do some things that they agree on, but that does not mean that they don't have substantial disagreement we get. So I think that's as something we should have in mind as we go forward to the conversation.

Speaker 2  10:14  
Yeah, important. Just to add to that, I don't think someone like Jordan Peterson will, will because, just because his audience is around 60% male, will consider himself part of the manosphere or or the views that he espouse as like a sub set of the manosphere people. People tend to make that mistake. People tend to, you know, lump him and Andrew Tate and the rest together, just because, just because, like I said last week, you will find some of the people in Andrew Tate's audience, in Jordan Peterson's audience, you know, that is what is causing the confusion

Speaker 3  10:59  
among people, because basically, they are sticking to the same demographic, mainly, right? Yes, yes. If you have, if you have the same kind of like audience, people will just like, okay, they are the they are all part of the amanos, fair. They are all part of, well said, they are the thing. But no, that's not that. Even some like somebody like Jordan will tell you that even though he gets that most of his audience are a male. Yeah. He doesn't speak only to young men. You understand. He also some. Many of his messages can also be helpful to even to reply to women. But all of that is lost in the context of this culture war

Speaker 2  11:39  
and everything. I think it's Yeah, culture was, I think it's, it's feminist, Western feminist who lumped Jordan Peterson, and it's because of his, of course, we know that viral incident that happened, I think 2018 between the British journalist and Peterson, yes, yeah. I think that was the origin before, yeah. China for Yeah, I think that was the origin of Peterson. Became known as this anti feminist, you know, so and within the feminist camp, if you're, if you're opposed to feminism, then you're automatically the devil and everything that is wrong with, everything that's wrong with, let's say, the subculture of male circles, you're being lumped into that group. That's what happened, I think, in my own opinion, because that's where it came from, if you trace everything back, yeah.

Speaker 3  12:30  
So let's you at the beginning, you mentioned you drop the drop some crazy, some terms that are used within this posture. I think we should go through some of those terms again, like, what those things are like? You talk about the alpha male, sigma, what, what? Yeah, what is, what is the what are? What does it mean to be a family, exactly, but this one, I said, people use it. I'm not really sure what it means to be honest, yeah,

Speaker 2  13:04  
it's, it's a it's a myth, like I said, it comes from. It comes from the animal kingdom, where you have the lone wolf and who has, like a pack moving packs, and so you have like one who is a leader, who dominates, makes, makes the decisions, and he's the one who holds the high status in within that group, and he's the one who gets the women, who the females, and all that

Speaker 3  13:37  
individual so What connection does it have with this,

Speaker 2  13:41  
with with the well, yeah, What? What? What the man was fair, what the the section of the manosphere that tries to inculcate that, that belief, the the idea is that you should move like every, every male should be, be an alpha male should move like, like the lone wolf moves in in the animal kingdom, you know, you should be the one to be in charge of yourself, of your life. You know the that's a positive aspect, I think that the that they apply, but you know, it doesn't work in real life, because even That in itself, even the concept of the alpha male is not true in the animal kingdom, is not true. It's simply not true.

Speaker 3  14:30  
Yeah, what do you mean is not true? Because I've heard some, I don't know if it is, some animal documentaries about wolves. I've seen talk like that. I've heard talks like that, like me, I'm talking specifically about the animal kingdom now, especially within wolves. I heard that come up a note. So you're saying that it is, it does not, it does not have any business in reality or what.

Speaker 2  14:56  
Yeah, it's, it's based on a theory that is not, that simply not. True about wolf behavior. So they are, like I said, that they are not applying it, they are misapplying it to humans, or applying a concept that is simply not true to humans.

Speaker 3  15:13  
Yeah, I get the part about them misapplying it to humans the same way they misapply many other things, even, yeah, evolutionary, evolutionary psychology and all that. And just for now, I just want to speak with the like, is there? Is there some? Is there? Is it the case that there is actually something? I think it's something that they are misapplying, but it exists in the animal kingdom, but it's just that they are just misapplying. Is it that there is no such thing as alpha dynamic in the alpha male, yeah,

Speaker 2  15:47  
yeah. I read somewhere like he came from, a book in 1970 book about Wolf, Wolf ecology. They were, they were describing, yeah. They were describing the wolf, the wolf, some of the wolves, not all of them, anyway, who were the alpha males, the dominant and aggressive ones. So even the author later stated that his claims were not accurate, but then it had already gathered like steam, and he was like popular, so popular, but then he was debunked as far back as the 70s, but quite recently, just started resurfacing. Came back to public consciousness because of the red pillars were just like everybody, all men have to be, you know, to be a high value individual, you

Speaker 3  16:40  
have to be an alpha male. I see, okay, so, but I'm aware that there is, like, even then, if we move away from home, even among teams, I'm aware that there is a, there's a hierarchy in how they organize or change society, like they have, like, something like, I don't know if they still use the same affirming type of concept we have, like, we normally have, like an alpha chief or something that who is, like the head of the any group, any particular chain group.

Unknown Speaker  17:13  
I don't know that.

Speaker 2  17:14  
Yeah, I think I've, yeah, I don't think it's accurate, because you to have to have such a sophisticated, sophisticated hierarchy requires some level of intelligence that we cannot expect from chimps. You know, they move in packs, they move in groups, but we cannot say specifically that there is a leader, just like we have among humans. There's somebody who is ensuring that everything is going

Speaker 3  17:41  
on because from what I think have heard, I've heard many my methodologies talk about this issue, people like, what's the name of this guy? This guy that he passed away recently, war. Okay, first the war, yeah, he, he talks about this thing that they have cheap teams organize themselves like, Sure, they are not as intelligent. Yeah. That doesn't mean that they don't have any intelligence. They have a certain level, I mean, level of intelligence. So it says that they have, they organize themselves in this way, like they do this, there's always like a head, like a head, who, who is the one that gets all the, gets all the goodies and all that. Yeah, that is something that I'm going to have to go and look into again, because it'll be quite long, right? I'm just saying that the it is something the concept that I'm familiar with in the animal kingdom, it doesn't have to be like among all species, but there are some species that we have certain level organization.

Speaker 2  18:57  
Think, I think we can, we can infer just by the size of the animals, I think, like, even among elephants, if you have, like, the largest one, the largest one may be feared a little more by the rest of the group, you know. So, so we can, maybe we can say this, there's a bit of respect among, yeah, because this one is, like, this is the largest one.

Speaker 3  19:20  
Even among dogs. I saw, I saw a video. I saw a video on YouTube. There were, there was a, like, a pack of dogs, and they were all like, like, making new things for themselves, rambling, playing around, fighting and doing nothing. Then one dog just came into the picture, and all of them were just no they were just bowing their head, distributing. We are just composed Exactly. And that God that was just like moving around. He was just pumped up. He pumped himself up, and he was just moving around. The others are just like, total silence. I think, is it? Is it? Is it? Is this things are in the animal kingdom? It's. Of that, as we've seen

Unknown Speaker  20:02  
these these guys are trying to exaggerate it,

Speaker 3  20:05  
yes, make it kind of seem, make this. They want to, like, fix it into human dynamics. And we know that it's always possible to do those things. But as for the news for that claim, I think there's, there is. I think a lot of people have talked about it, that there is like an hierarchy, even in the animal kingdom, among certain groups of species,

Speaker 2  20:26  
the hierarchy exists. I think the hierarchy exists, not within like a species, but

Speaker 3  20:34  
no, yes, not like within the old species. Just like most species, they have group like you have the good like wolves going back, Lions going right, yeah, so like that, that's what I mean. Not like between the whole, no, they don't know what I'm saying, Yeah.

Speaker 2  20:51  
Of course, the animals are scared of other animals and predators, you know, the predators they prey on, the and the others. I think that, in that, in that way, that's, that's kind of like, like a hierarchy,

Unknown Speaker  21:06  
fascinating concept, after you

Unknown Speaker  21:10  
satisfy the animal kingdom.

Speaker 3  21:14  
But, like, I don't think those things can be neatly mapped into human behavior. So I agree with you there that these guys, they are like, Yeah, over simplifying things. They're not going to be tired. They are like, yeah, making okay. Just take. Just take. Let's take that example of a family, which you talked about. Let's just look at, let's try to look at it from a practical perspective. What is what? What what is it going to look like if this thing is something that these guys are going around saying, All, all, all men should enable to be a family, if every man, if every man is an affair, then who will be the like, like? Who is going to be like the better males?

Speaker 2  21:58  
Exactly. That is, that is the problem. That's what makes it so problematic. It's not applicable in real life. It's not realistic. It's just not practical.

Speaker 3  22:08  
So that's that's it for the alpha male. What about the sigma you mentioned? What does that happen?

Speaker 2  22:14  
The sigma is the individual who is like dogged doesn't move, doesn't move. The Sigma signifies solitude, but embodies some of the qualities of the of the alpha male. He's not moving with the crowd. It's not moving with with an entourage, but he's alone, but he's dogged, fearless, and some of the qualities that that the alpha male possesses possess. That was the difference between the sigma and the alpha. Then the beta is, like, is like the inferior one. It's very funny,

Unknown Speaker  22:49  
yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what they used to.

Speaker 3  22:55  
That's like the geo getting what they used to, exactly the simp

Speaker 2  23:01  
is the is the beta is a bitter meal, yeah,

Speaker 3  23:05  
okay, fascinating. So, what about the other concept? What other thing? What you talked about, stoicism, yeah, this one is very interesting, because stoicism, what, what people when you say stoicism today, people have a sapping, an image in their head, which is, yeah, but stoicism is not that, not that simple. Is a is an interesting philosophy, yeah, exactly, yeah, that many of these guys who call themselves things they don't even know what the weird that thing? What do you mean? They don't know exactly. It's just like people from from have made it popular in modern culture without really going through the roots of stoicism. Stoicism is one of the, one of the top schools, one of the top school in ancient Athens. No, not in the ancient Athens, the the Hellenized war then Greece Greeks. Yeah, there was a fusion. There was a fusion between the Greeks and the Romans. Yeah, you understand. So, so that school of stoicism, it it's originated in Greeks, in Greek in Greece, ancient right, but it became transported well into more Roman culture, you understand? So, yeah, it was one of the rival other schools were, like the Epicureans, the they had the Epicureans, they had the like. They have different school of socialism. Was just one of, one of the top ones there, and they were competing against each other. And the Stoics, what the stoics believe was that they had a they had a particular kind of metaphysics. They. Had formed their Yes sir. They had this. They believe in things like destiny, like faith. They believe in things like a kind of determinism, almost you understand it's just like a philosophy that tells you that, look, there are things that are going to happen regardless of what you do. So you have to accept this thing. Accept it exactly. Accept your faith

Speaker 2  25:23  
you you can control. Accept the things you can control, and just, you know, the things you can't control, you have to

Speaker 3  25:32  
let them be. Yeah. So there was a particular guy then his name was Epictetus. Epictetus was the one who was the one who kind of, like, like, made that, made it cool back then. Then the other people, they're like, Marcus, Aurelius. Marcus is one another, popular, most of these guys, if you ask them, name is three philosopher, you probably they will know, is that they might know. They will tell you, because he's kind of like, yeah, he's the one that this guy, with this modern author writing on this topic, is the one that is, you know, Ryan Holiday. Have you heard of this guy? Ryan Holiday? No, yeah, he has. He has written many books, or many best selling books on this topic. So he normally uses this guy, this Marcus Arios, as he is. Marcus Ariel's was a was a woman and King. He was a king. They normally call him the Emperor. No fucking because he was an emperor. Yeah. So, so he weren't even, even became single. Like confusing, because he was not actually, he was not from the hair. He was not a natural heir to the throne, in the sense that he his father died and he became king. No, he, he was unpicked by a previous thing, like he was, like an orphan boy or something that was that was ruined by that man. The man, just like the man, sidelined his own children and picked Marcus awareness because he thought that he saw something special anymore. So he was this, you watched Gladiator.

Speaker 2  27:21  
Yeah, I've not really watched it, but I've been meaning to watch it when the when the recent one that featured the star, then what's his name, Denzel Washington, came out. I think

Speaker 3  27:32  
that's the second one. This one is, yeah, this is the new one, yeah, yeah. I'm talking about the first one. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  27:40  
That was, I haven't gotten

Speaker 3  27:43  
around to watch with you, yeah, so that that movie was kind of like it was an adaptation of trying to from that period you get, because that Maximus, he was the one that Marcus Aurelius wanted to take over as king. Assuming you've watched the movie, you have like, an idea of what I'm saying, because was he appeared briefly in that movie. So basically, Marcus Aurelius became emperor, and he was during this period where you know how ancient time on the world, so many war I mean, those kind of difficult things. There are many challenging things. So he had, like this guy, not like somebody that have a gun, like in the morning, like you wake up and then you write down, like, I don't know how your day went. Then you have nuggets of wisdom. That was what he was doing, basically. So that that book, that means meditations, that's what is called meditation. That's the name of the book. That book was not intense. He was not published as a book. It was just his own personal diary. Wow, you understand, yeah. He was just like writing these things, and somehow, after he, after he died, now, took this thing with Darien, started publishing it, and it seemed like the handbook of stoicism. Yeah, many of the things he was writing, there are things that he learned from the from people like Epictetus and video or all that he was just like one was using his own experiences, his own life experiences. You will just find something like, okay, when you wake up, when you wake up in the morning, say to yourself that I'm going to experience so I'm going to experience good people. I'm going to experience Vagabond they are going to try to to perceive me. You understand exactly, exactly so, but I'm not going to allow myself to be controlled by then. You understand like, yeah, he had this saying that that what people do is out of your control. How you react is what you should be able to control, and reaction Exactly. So he was, for example, let's say you go out, you, you, you're on your way to work, and maybe you, you're in your car, and some, some really driver, just like, you know, overtake you or start insulting you diligently, like that. Now you are three or two to to react, right? Just imagine that you are in the middle some one driver just don't call him at you. And now my concern realize we say, Now, if you react in that way, if you start running with some back at that driver, that means, allow that driver to take control over you. Said, do not allow that. Not give people that power over your your reaction. So just those are the kind of kind of messages that he was giving them, but at the same time, there were lots of other like

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
