Hello and welcome to the Dialogue's podcast with Kingsley and Patrick.
In today's episode, we explore the countless and sensitive topic
of assisted suicide and euthanasia. Join us as we delve into the moral and legal aspects,
sharing real life stories, arguments, counter-arguments, and relevant insights.
Hi everyone, welcome to today's episode. We are diving into a very heavy but important topic,
assisted suicide and euthanasia. We are going to ask two big questions today.
First, is assisted suicide and euthanasia ever morally permissible?
And second, should they be legalized? To ground the discussion, we will start with three world
stories that show the difficult edge cases people face, one involving mixed physical and mental
suffering from trauma, one centered on deep mental and emotional suffering, and one representing
terminal physical suffering, and then we will explore the arguments for and against. But the
first story is about mixed physical and mental suffering. A 25-year-old Spanish woman by the
name of Noelia Castillo-Ramos endured multiple sexual assaults, including a gang rape. She
attempted suicide by jumping from a fifth floor building, survived or was left paralyzed from
the waist down with chronic pain and severe psychological trauma. Despite her father's legal
battle to stop it, Noelia requested and received euthanasia in Spain on March 26, 2006. She wanted
to live in peace to stop the suffering. So this case, as we can see, combines extreme physical
disability with mental scars. So the second story is about a woman by the name of Wendy Duffy,
and this one is focused on mental suffering. 56-year-old British mother Wendy Duffy lost her
only son, Marcus, aged 23 when he choked to death in front of her four years ago, but as in front
of the woman, despite therapy and medication, she went through intense grief, which later became
unbearable. Physically healthy, Wendy chose to travel to a clinic in Switzerland for assisted
dying. She died wearing assault shirts. This is a clear example of somebody who is seeking assisted
death, primarily because of crushing mental and emotional suffering. So the third story and the
last story is focused on physical suffering, and this is about terminal illness, and this
involves Brittany Maynard. In 2014, 29-year-old American Brittany Maynard was diagnosed with
terminal brain cancer and aggressive glioblastoma. Doctors gave out only a few months to live.
As a tumor grew, she faced violent seizures, unbearable headaches, and the prospect of losing
speech, motor function, and control of her body. Rather than endure a slow painful decline, Brittany
moved to Oregon, where assisted dying was legal, on November 1, 2014. So this was a very popular
story at the time that broke out. She was surrounded by her family. She peacefully ended her own life on
her own terms, and her dying words were, I do not want to die, but I am dying, and so I'm going to die
with my dignity. So these three cases that I've briefly recapped, show us the range of situations
that people face from terminal physical illness to trauma that leaves both physical and mental scars
to profound mental suffering after devastating loss.
It's very good that you presented those cases to give listeners an idea of why people decide to
take this step, because it is not something that is taken lightly here. So I think the
next thing that we should do is to define what exactly we are talking about when you talk about
assisted suicide or euthanasia. What exactly are we talking about? We need to give some definition,
because there are two different things actually. Assisted suicide is, from the world's suicide
there, people should have an idea of what it is. If suicide is the act of taking one's own life,
then assisted suicide is the act of taking one's own life with the assistance of another. So ideally,
they should be doctors or physicians, like in in Canada, for example, Canada is one of the countries
that we are going to talk about where this is already legal. So they have what is called medical
assistance in dying. So it's not like we are just talking about like any random person can just
do this job. We are talking about qualifying medical practitioners who they are the ones who are
assisting the person who wants to take their life. And there are several ways that this
assistance can be rendered. But the most common method that is used in places where this is legal
for assisted suicide is appeal. They have like appeal. You go, the prescribed appeal, the doctor
prescribed appeal to the person who is seeking the service. And then the person will have to
take the appeal. So that is why it is called assisted suicide. So you are just a physician
that I don't assist in. Whereas euthanasia involves the physicians who really want to
administer the mode of killing the person. So euthanasia actually has, we have voluntary euthanasia
and then we have non-voluntary euthanasia. So let me try to break down the streets. Voluntary
euthanasia is just similar to the case of assisted suicide. Here we have somebody who wants to,
like who has, and now we are talking about a competent adult. Not like just anybody can
just wake up and go and require the service. So we're talking about people who are deemed to be
sound enough and rational enough and who are maybe experiencing extreme forms of suffering
and they find this suffering to be unbearable. You've given some good examples. So this person
can either go to the physician and the physician can administer the means by which they can now
take their own life. In the case of euthanasia, the physician will actually be the one to do the
job. So that is voluntary. That means it is voluntary on the part of the individual to give
grand officials the permission to end their life. It can be done through maybe injection,
I think there are different methods of mostly injection. So the person will die very quickly.
And you talked about dignity and deaths in one of the cases. So this is that you die on your own
terms, you fix the dates, you spend some time with your closest relatives and then on the day you
go to the physician and they administer the dose. That is so voluntary euthanasia. Now,
non-voluntary euthanasia involves situations whereby the person who is suffering is not
competent enough to make the decision. For example, we can have somebody who is like in a vegetative
state, somebody who is under life support. This person is not competent to be able to
make the request. Another example that is very common, pet owners can relate to this. Like when
you have a pet, maybe for example a dog and they've gotten to a stage of their life, maybe they have
like an illness and they are suffering and the case is just broken. So human beings can make that
decision for their pets. The pet owners can decide to take that pet to the veterinary for it to be
put down, to spare it from that suffering. So these are the differences between assisted
suicide, voluntary euthanasia and non-voluntary euthanasia. But for the purpose of this episode,
we will be focusing on assisted suicide and voluntary euthanasia because we have somebody
who is competent enough, actually enough to assess their situation and decide that their
the quality of their life is so low that it would be better for them to die and to continue
existing in such miserable states. Just to add something that this is mostly a western
phenomenon. We don't see this in Africa. No African countries have any euthanasia laws.
What do you think about that? None. And it just makes me wonder why that is the case.
You are right. There is no single African country where any of these practices are currently
legal. But even in the west, very few countries have it legal. So it is something that is even
not part of the west. I'm only aware of five countries where it is legal in the west. So
it's kind of a more country, although it's being talked about more now. Like I know that in Britain,
in America, in some states in America, it's legal. In the United Kingdom too, it's a very
serious discussion that's being had. In the United Kingdom, there is some, I think the
bill has already crossed the first phase. So it is now, I think they are very close to legalizing
in the UK, right now, as you speak. But as far as countries where it has been legal, it is legal.
We have Netherlands, Switzerland, Belgium, Canada, and there are some states in the US.
I think Netherlands represents the most extreme case of euthanasia and the assisted dying. I think
that country is known as the most liberalized country in the world because of things like abortion,
prostitution, drug use, and euthanasia. It was the first country to legalize all of these things.
And it's also kind of like the study case for other countries because that's the country that
people are using, other countries are using to test and see because they are studying how well
these policies have gone. And people are torn on the implications because I've noticed that
in my research, I noticed that how people look at it is based on their ideologies or their
political views. If you're a libertarian, you have a pro-euthanasia view. But if you're like a
conservative, you are mostly anti. And if you look at it like, of course, we are going to go to the
argument for and against. If you look at it, both sides have legitimate arguments and we will go
into that. But like you mentioned, you already mentioned the five countries, Belgium, Netherlands,
Canada, Spain, Switzerland, and I think you mentioned some states in America where it's legal.
I think we can go into exactly how it is practiced in each of these countries.
What, how about we differentiate between the moral angle and the legal angle? Because I think
this is also going to be relevant. Okay, yeah, yeah, I will go into that.
Because I think we should do that before we start going to the countries where it is legal.
Listen to that, know the difference or if there is any. Because there are people that think that
if something is moral, then by definition, that thing ought to be legal. And if something is immoral,
that thing ought to be illegal. Right? But this is a mistake. It is very possible for something to
be moral, for you to view something as moral, morally permissible. And yet we see that it
should not be legalized. Similarly, it is very possible for you to view something as immoral.
And yet think that it should be legal. So I will give some examples to make it clear
to people who aren't familiar with these things. For example, in the United States of America,
they have the concept of the freedom of speech. It's a very big deal in the U.S. So freedom of
speech essentially is saying that people should have the right to express themselves, to say
things that they want without fear of being persecuted by the law. Now, an advocate of freedom
of speech is very well aware that when you give people the freedom of speech, they are going to
be, who are going to use that speech to say some immoral things, you know, but at the same time,
you can realize, you can realize that, okay, this person is immoral for saying this kind of thing,
having these views. But at the same time, he is legally protected. He has the right to say those
things. Even though I find those things morally reprehensible, I am still going to grant him
these rights to be able to say those things. So that is one example of where you can view
something as immoral. At the same time, it is legal, not penalized. So on the other
angle, yes, something can be viewed as immoral, but it shouldn't be special. This particular case
we are discussing in the case of Assisted Society is a good example. One of the most common arguments
that people normally make against Assisted Dile or Assisted Society and do not tell you to let
go is that this one is known as a Slippery Slope Argument. So essentially, it's that
Now, I might find this thing to be immoral. I might consider this practice to be a practice
to be morally permissible, that there is nothing wrong with it. But at the same time,
I don't want it to be made legal, because if it is legal, then it is going to now allow people to
use it in cases where they are not supposed to use it. So it's going to be abused or something
like that. So because of that, I don't want to take that chance. We should not make it
legal. So that is just a way of teasing out the difference between the concepts of morality
and legality. Yeah, just to add to that, I think an example of how something can be legal,
but immoral, is being a racist. You can be a racist. Let's use America as an example. I say
you hate black people, you hate white people, you hate Hispanic people, you are free to say that.
It is immoral because it is according to the intuition of most people, it's a bad thing,
it's a wrong thing to say, but it is not illegal to say that. I think that's a very simple way
to put it. So in places like in Netherlands, like I said, it started with a very strict criteria.
That was in 2002 when these laws were first put in place. It was a long time ago for adults with
terminal physical illness and unbearable suffering, and then it spread over time to let the criteria
expand it. And that's what you were talking about, the slippery slope whereby it started with a
certain category, a certain category, and then it expands to include other categories. So today,
it includes non-terminal cases, the country conditions, and even people who say they are
tired of life, which is highly controversial to seek assisted dying or suicide because you're
tired of life. So in Canada, you mentioned the MAID program, which stands for medically assisted,
okay, medical assistance in dying. So it's a program that has grown rapidly in Canada,
and it began as an option mainly for terminal illness, and it has moved towards including
mental illness now. And debates are being heard about this publicly, and they are concerned about
whether some vulnerable people, like the elderly people, disabled, and people struggling with mental
health, if they are sometimes being steered towards death instead of receiving better support and care.
And I think we are still going to touch on this, but let me just introduce it briefly. I was thinking
about what this means if this is being adopted on a large scale, because like you said, there are
countries who are having these debates, and you know, they're having it in political forums like
the Parliament, and like you said, in Britain, it has passed the first phase, you know, they're
having these debates. What does this mean for medical research, you know, if there is an option
to just end your life, if things are not going well? And there's also an argument for lack of
palliative care from the government, you know, whether you're supposed to have a structured
kind of support from government, a medical support from government, you know, and all of this
are not being, the focus is being moved from assistance to nudging you to take your own life.
So that's a lot of view against it.
Spain legalized within Asia more recently, and in Noelia's case, it shows how we can apply to
younger people with complex trauma. We come to that. So, like we have hinted at, again,
the big question is once you open the door, how do you prevent it from expanding further?
Are we seeing genuine compassion for unbearable suffering, or are we risking a slippery slope
where the value of people's lives, certain lives, and start to be questioned? I think
that's looking at all of the countries we can examine these questions.
Yeah, you've lived through the countries, and you've everyone gone beyond and started
pointing out some arguments that people are making against legalization, right?
Yeah. So we are going to present these arguments formally, and we're going to see if the
actually, if the non-legalization or what's, before that, I think we should present the case
the argument for why the argument that proponents, proponents of international
access to society, the argument that they put forward, why this thing should be right is,
which is, first of all, morally punishable, and why it should also be legal.
Then after we've gone through the argument, then we can now focus on the counter-argument,
or the argument that opponents are making. So one of the most common arguments we hear,
if you're following online spaces that talk about this issue, or if you are just,
if you are familiar with the literature on this subject, one of the arguments that you,
one phrase that you keep saying that keeps coming up is the right to die.
Yeah, autonomy.
Yeah, it's part of thinking, but basically the right to die. So it is like saying,
the idea is considering that we all are great, that human beings have a right to life.
So the very fact that people who have a right to life, by that same measure,
there should also be a right to die. Because as you said, autonomy,
these are some of the things that people used to justify the right to life.
What's, at the same time, autonomy can also justify the right to,
so why, why are we inconsistent? Why are we stopping at saying somebody has a right to
life? Because he has a, he has the right to autonomy or safety determination.
But that same person does not have the right to end the trend he wants to on his own parents.
Especially when we consider the fact that none of our foundation we are sought before we are brought
into this world, right? Yeah. We are just thrown into this world without our consent.
So why can't we have the right to opt out, especially in situations whereby continued
life is deemed to be way worse than death? Because it is, I think it is uncontroversable
that life can get so bad. The quality of life can get so bad to the point where death is preferable.
Where people can lost interest, rational agents can learn that this life is no longer
in my interest. I would rather have it end now and I will do it on my own parents.
Yeah. So that is we had the right to die argument,
spending it for the human beings, which will also have a right to die.
It's based on concepts like autonomy. Now, there is also another way that people argue for
assisted suicide and brutal euthanasia. And this is with the right to life itself.
So in other words, we don't even need to postulate a right to die. Like there is no need for us to
say we have to now start making the case for a right to die. No. They say the right to life itself
should, if we understand it properly, we should be able to grant and justify things like assisted
suicide and brutal euthanasia. And I will just explain how. So basically, when we say somebody
has a right to life, what are we saying? What we are saying is that this person has the right
not to be killed. Right? Yeah. Yeah. That is the understanding. So I have a right to be killed.
So it's a negative right. I will talk about it. Look at all the rights that people have.
Let's say the right to property rights. Like I have a right to my house. You have a right to
your own house. So in the sense that if I were to intrude into your house without your permission,
like you have the right to kick me out. That is what it means to have property rights. But notice
that property rights, for example, can be waived. Rights can actually be waived. For example, when
you have a visitor, you've waived your rights. You've waived it. Even if it is temporarily,
it doesn't have to be permanently. You can waive your rights temporarily. When you have a visitor,
what you are doing is you raise that right temporarily. Temporarily, you allow that person in.
Now, not just that. Why that person is still in your house. You still retain the right
to reassert it. If that person provoked you, you can drive that part of your house,
understand? So that is one way to understand what that right is typically treated. So rights
are actually things that are waverable. Another example would be something like, let's say for
example, I have a resource. I have a resource and who just used my property right away. But that
my resource, I can lend it to somebody. I can lend it to you. Okay, maybe you want to go to a party
and I'll lend it to you. That for that period, you don't make news of it. Then later on, you can return
it to me. That is one way to waive the right. But I can also, that is the temporary waiving.
Similar to this example. But I can also give you that bridge. I can waive the right permanently.
That is when I give it to you as a gift, I say, okay, this now belongs to you. I've transferred
the ownership to you. So I no longer have the right to the resource, you understand? So similarly,
when we talk about the right to life, the right to life also should be able to waive it.
Like if we get to a position whereby competent humans think that their life is no longer of
interest then, that equality has now become so bad, it's so serious, we come to unbearable,
that we can also waive the right. Now, waiving the right to life does not mean then that
any somebody can hurry, can now have the right to come and kill you. No, waiving the right
room is that you can assign somebody to do the job. At the time of your choosing,
do a method of your choosing. And ideally, it should be somebody who is qualified.
He recommends to doctors because they are the ones that can do the job efficiently and in a
in a swift, speedy manner. So that is the way that the right to life itself
can justify as a step society and we don't carry any utensils here. So now we've done the right
right to die, the right to life. There is also a third way in case somebody wants to argue that
there is no such thing as rights because there are people who don't believe in rights. Okay, fine,
we don't need the right, we don't need to appeal to a right to life, we don't need it. All we need
is that this person's life, I've taught my life to be not what's continuing. I'm so free,
so much required that I didn't, I think it will be favorable for me to die after continuing living
in this court itself. Now, if that is the case, then by that metric itself, I can decide that,
okay, I want to end this project that it will be in a sense, okay, for you to somebody who is
suffering musically, and you want to force them to continue suffering. So it is a compassion,
it's an agreement from compassion, that the compassionate thing to do when we see people
who are suffering so much, and they've made the decision themselves that they want to go,
that it will be inconsevict for us to deny the opponents of assisted society that you tell
yourself, usually I agree for their position. I don't know if you have anything to add to it.
Yeah, it's just based on the idea of personal freedom. My body, my choice, my life, I can do
whatever I want to do, and the state should not have any power to prevent you from doing what
you want to do, even if it involves taking your own life at any point. And the initial criteria was
terminal illness. People who have somebody in their family, like a family member who has gone
through this, and I personally have my own story, I took care of somebody who suffered greatly, and
I knew that they were going to die. And what happened was that their suffering was prolonged,
it was prolonged. So in the case of in countries where euthanasia and assisted dying are legalized,
then such a person can decide to end the suffering instead of allowing it to continue for a long
time. So yeah, I think there are arguments that can be made. The proponents of this, of euthanasia
instead of dying, have solid arguments to back up their proposition. So yeah, I think we can proceed
to the arguments against. As you say, there are people who argue against it, who are not
convinced, and they have their own arguments. One of the common argument that is put forward
against it is what's known as the sanctity of life argument. It has a religious version,
and you see mostly religious people are the ones that like to use it. Yeah. But at the same time,
it doesn't really put it free. Yeah, it is used a lot in debates about abortion and all that. So
it is also used to argue against the immorality and disability, or just legalizing assisted suicide
or voluntary euthanasia. So I would just try to summarize it. Like I said, it has a religious
version. The religious version goes like this. That human beings are created in the image of God.
Therefore, we have no authority, or we have no right to intentionally end somebody's life,
regardless of whatever agony they are going through. That is like the religious version. It is
appealing to the fact that we are created by God and all that. But there is also a circular version
there's a particular philosopher who wrote the paper making this case. His argument was that
by virtue of the fact that we are rational agents and we have this capacity that possesses an
intrinsic dignity, which entitles it to protection. Regardless of suffering. Regardless of suffering,
that it is inherent in our human nature. So it is not necessarily appealing to God,
but at the same time stopping on the same idea of intrinsic value. Yeah, so that is one argument
that is put forward against it. No, they are saying like, if we allow this thing, what we are
saying is that we don't value life. We don't value human life, you understand? And is it the same
worldview that puts human life above other species? Yeah, yeah, it is the same line of thinking. But
there are some problems with the authenticity of life arguments. So I'm just going to,
I'm going to point out the problems really, that may be how I allow you to come back
and say something. So the first problem with his view is that his sense of life argument is
largely the religious version now. Now, the claim that human beings are created in the image of
God. First of all, the claim is equal to a vassal one. It is not one that is an assassin's one
that needs to be justified. So you can't just assert that human beings are created in the image of
God and just leave it like that. Especially when you know that not everybody believes your religion
and laws are not made for people of only one religion, right? We have no religious people
in many parts of the world, including in Nigeria who don't believe in your God. So that one is
another thing you cannot, it doesn't really fly for me. But then if we go to the other aspect
where he talks about the by virtue of the fact that we are rational beings and we have this
capacity, it is like really, is that the criteria you want to use? Because you and I know, we both
know that not every human being has this capacity, this rational capacity. There are literally people
who are born with cognitive impairment, right? We have people who maybe as an result of something
that happened, they lose that capacity. So human beings can lose rational capacity. In fact,
infants, for example, they don't have rational capacity and there are adults who are in state
whereby they don't have that cognitive capacity. In fact, some animals have more cognitive capacities
than some human beings. So if you want to base this sanctity of life on that idea, then are you
saying it is now okay? You have to consider, okay, infants and adults who are cognitively impaired,
they are now free given. But of course, they are not going to sign up to that.
Yeah, if you see me that to the kind of argument that makes it a myth,
they will tell you that animals don't have rational capacity. And then when you point out that
there are some humans who also don't have this, they will now start trying to look for regular,
to regular out of the consequence of their own criteria that they themselves laid out.
So these are the problems that I can detect with that sanctity of life. But there's also
another problem because everybody knows that even religious people who like to have one about this
being created in the image of God and all that, even if they have instances whereby they have no
problem with taking life. So for example, many religious people are very okay with
capital punishment. Most religious people are in support of capital punishment. So if you want
to say, okay, we cannot take life because life, we have created the image and likeness of God,
then why are you supporting capital punishment? Yes, your argument cannot be categorical.
So it is not doing the job that you want it to do.
Yeah, yes. And then they are also pro-life.
Therefore, that is one, this comment, yeah, we're not talking about the abortion,
we are trying to just want to stick to the argument that okay, because we have created
this image of God, we cannot take life. But no, we have, even you have a session that you allow
for, in cases of capital punishment, you are okay with taking life that was created in the image
and likeness of God, right? So if you can make an exception for that case, why can't you make an
exception in a case where somebody is suffering greately, where that person themselves views
that their life is no longer in their interest and they would rather it ends, have continuous
suffering. Why can't you make the exception productive? So yeah, it's a case of cherry
picking because they are not consistent in that worldview. They don't apply it across the board.
There are areas where they are like, no, no, no, i can't apply it here. And then there are areas where
they apply it. So that's very problematic. If you choose when to apply it and when not to apply it,
then it just speaks to your character as a person holding this view. And because it is not
contingent on a well thought out plan or reasoning. That's why it falls apart and that's why it's
inconsistent when people apply it. You just want to add that. Yeah, and you have to remember that
advocates of assisted suicide and I will not tell you to share, they are not arguing that
it should be, that it will be punishable in every single case. They are saying there are certain
cases whereby it should be allowed. Now it is the opponents that are saying there are no cases
where it should be allowed. So you can see that they have a higher body and the higher body that
they have is very, it seems to me that it is very difficult to justify. There's also some of them
who say things like we should not treat human life as an instrumental good. That is a basic
good necessary for human flourishing. Basically, life is the precondition for flourishing. But the
problem with this line of thought is that the same life is the precondition for misery. So it
goes back to the cherry picking that you referenced earlier. Yeah, so I don't think that's safety
of life arguments really does the job that they want it to do basically. So to add to what you said
to your point, you can't preach sanctity of life and just be like a selfish person who
only thinks about themselves. And if you're preaching about sanctity of life, then we need to see
you engage in humanitarian work to help people ease their suffering, these kinds of things.
It shows that you care because you are literally at the forefront of the movement. Let's see what
these people are doing. These groups are not organizations that are doing real work in the
world to help people who are suffering. If we see that, then maybe the argument can hold
some weight, but you can't just sit back and then use religious injunctions to propagate
your worldview. It doesn't work like that. It's kind of like a laid back and shallow way to push
the movement. So if possible, these people could engage in to show compassion, real compassion,
you know, engage in real humanitarian work. Just to add to what you said. Yeah,
this is also for David Benatar. There's a very good quote on this particular subject. I'm going to
read out the quote because I think it is very, it explains the situation perfectly. So just
for me to read out the quote. All right. So here it goes. Once we recognize that life could become
so bad that continued life is no longer in one's interest, we must also recognize that a right
not to be killed can uplift its moral purpose. To protect an individual that is okay, that is
to protect an individual's important interest. If a right to life does not include a power to
waive the right, then instead of the right, serving the interest of the right bearer, it becomes the
right bearer's master. And the worse the quality of life is, the more cruel a master it is. Yeah,
so that's basically, it captures the issue brilliantly there because people, these people
they want to say, ah, life is this, life is this, you know, that is why we have a right to life,
that you cannot, that is like, yeah, it's actually, you have to act yourself. Okay, why do we have
rights in the first place? Why do we even need rights in the first place? If not to, if not to
protect our interests, to protect our interests. Yeah, we have interests in being able to own
properties. That means we deduce from that that we have property rights. You have interests in
preserving your life. That we deduce from that that we have a right to life. But we should also
recognize that this same life that we have, that we cherish so much, that it can get to a point,
to no fault of our own, it can get to a point whereby we no longer have that interest. The
right can actually uplift its, its purpose. The right, whereby the right is no longer
in line with our interests, that means it has uplifted its purpose. And it should not want to insist
that despite that, people should be, to continue living. That means the right is no longer doing
the job that we've assigned it to do. It is not doing the opposite. Instead of we being the masters
of the right, the right is now, has control, is now a master of violence. So it is, it becomes
counter, the purpose becomes counterattractive. So that's, I think that has started on the
sanctity of life argument. I don't think it really holds up. But there are other
arguments that they make. Another of the arguments they put forward is that the, that if we allow
assisted suicide and voluntary detention, it is going to affect the vulnerable. And when they,
when they say the vulnerable, what they are talking about, they are usually thinking about
people who are like maybe elderly people. Yeah, they say, but in less privilege, even some of
them argue that it is going to disproportionately affect poor people. Yeah, poor people. Yeah.
Like poor people are the ones that are going to suffer this and all that. But for, this is an,
it is actually something that can be looked at empirically. We can look at the example of
countries where it has been legalized for some time now and see, okay, is this, is this the case?
Is this, is this the case that in Netherland, poor people are the ones that are being dragged to,
or people are being, you know, everybody's been forced. So, people, people, people are being
picked from the streets and just being the nice, like, this is not true. We have, we have, it has
been legal in Netherland since 2002. That is how many years now. Yeah, I think, I think a legitimate
point is, is that these are mostly wealthy countries. The five countries are mostly wealthy
countries where it is statistically unlikely for it to affect poor people, since there are almost
no poor people there. Well, if, if it could spread to poorer countries, countries of the
global, like African countries and Latin American countries, then of course, for people are going
to be affected. So it's kind of like a, it's statistically an observation. It's not just,
it's not just like affected, like affected in what way, in what sense. The idea is that these people,
there's, these are people that don't want it. It's just like, they will say, okay, during the Nazi
regime, there was a, there was a euthanasia program that was done by the Nazi, whereby they were
euthanizing disabled people, people, people of certain races, you know, the people that they
deemed to not be able to contribute to the, to the society that they were forcefully
bringing this thing to them. That is it. That is what they are talking about as people that,
these people that don't have, like say, maybe my notes on that they are going to be,
or people that are poor, that they are going to be taking advantage of. That is what is
being addressed. If something like this is, let's say it's allowed in Africa, whereby there are so
many poor people. It's down to personal authority. Yeah, it is. Yeah, we sit down to personal,
it's still down to the personal choice, but I think what, what the, the argument,
crux of the argument is the pressure, the pressure that comes with, with these people,
these vulnerable people, the elderly, the poor people, disabled people. If there are other
disabled people who are, who are taking their own lives because they are going through unbearable
suffering, then the pressure extends, the societal pressure extends to other people
in the same category, who might not be exactly going through the same level of suffering. Of
course, not everybody goes through the same level of suffering, but think, well, maybe my life is
not worth living since I'm disabled or I'm poor or I am elderly. Maybe I should take my life.
I think that is the, that is the, that is one, that is one side of the slippery slope argument.
So of course it's down to personal choice, but there is also influence from society. I think
that's what they are talking about, but yeah, I think that's what they're talking about here.
I get the concern. I'm not saying that this, I'm not saying that the concern is on what I've
said. I think it's a reasonable concern. What I'm saying is that even in these cases, okay,
let's take the Netherlands for example, and places, places where it is, it has been like a lie.
Do you know that people that are, because even in those countries, they still have,
they still have, they still have higher class, lower class and the, I mean, lower class and the
lower class. Do you know that the people who, the people who utilize this service the most
are actually paid from the higher class? Yeah. Yeah. That is, that is the, that is the thing.
It is actually the poor people in those, the people that are considered poor in those communities,
they are not using these services as a, as a people, because we know that even normally
rich people, they, they like to control their narrative. They have the resources. It is one thing.
They have the resources and they also like to control their narrative. So it is not,
it is not like there is something about, about the parties that is going to,
that is going to make it disproportionately affect poor people. Right by we can see that in
social, in these other societies, it is actually the affluence that are, that are using this thing
more. You understand what I'm saying? So even if it comes down to Africa, it is still going to be
the same situation. It's still going to be the affluence that are more likely to utilize this
service. You understand? It's so far as, it is something that is not, it has to be done for
long time. Like I said, like we said earlier on, you have to be a, a competent person who is able
to make this choice for themselves. And not just that. It's not like you just make this choice
and you go to the clinic and then they just give you, no, they are actually guardrails.
If, if you've studied the house is done in these other countries, they have processes,
apps that you have to, you have threshold that you have to meet. But in other words, you have to
convince, your case has to be convincing enough. You understand? So because if you're coming to me
and you're telling me that you, you, you want to die, that I should assist you, it will be irresponsible
on my part and on the part of any physician or any government. So they'll say, okay, yes, the
people take it. No, we have to, you have to also convince me that your case is bad enough. I have
to them to see that there's truly, this person is, his life has begun to come to this point, say by
it, it's, it's not a line of interest to continue existing. So we have to be, the thing is, people
like to, the opponents of this view, they like to fear manga. This is what is. Yeah, that's it.
Yes. Then I'm telling you, it is just fear mongering because they, they have
a judge in ideological reasons why they don't want this thing to go through. So they are coming
up with every kind of, they are wanting to do and say anything to make sure that this thing doesn't
pass. So they like, is that they included as aggression, they misrepresent the view.
Matt Walsh, I don't know if you're familiar with Matt Walsh, he made the
Yeah. And I responded to that. I actually responded to that post. He just mischaracterized,
he mischaracterized the whole process as it was, as it is being done. The way he described it,
you would think that people are just moving from, there are people who are moving in the street
just taking people and just killing them. But that's not fair. If you want to
comfort an argument, represent it accurately. You understand? Nobody is being forced.
This is something that is done voluntarily. And if you want to say, okay, there's going to be
social pressure. I'm like, okay, so what? There is social pressure on everything. There is not a
single thing that we do that isn't based on social pressure. If you want to use that,
there are arguments. Religious people, for example, it is an undisputable fact
that the vast majority of religious people are simply religious because of the environment
that they were brought up in. Is that not social pressure? That is. Yeah. So this is something
that affects all facets of our lives. You can't just say, it is going to, because you don't like
this thing, then you invoke it. But me or you as a religious person, if you were born in an artistic
society, you probably won't be a religious person. You understand? So I don't think this is a,
this is like, okay, should we now make, if somebody now comes out and says, okay, because of this,
I'm going to make religion illegal. Would they think it is justified?
You say, no, you are only religious because you are, because of your social pressure.
You say, social pressure does not mean, you know, it doesn't mean that people can't make,
we can say make choices. This is infund with social pressure. We cannot escape it.
Literally everything we are doing there, social pressure is going to be attached to it. So if we
start saying certain things can't be legal because of social pressure, that means we would have any,
like many of the institutions that we allow wouldn't be allowed because they are mostly based on,
they are largely based on, yeah. So that's not a good argument in my view.
So yeah, you've raised some important points about pressure and social pressure because,
like I said, these people like to make this argument because they like to project themselves
as people who care about human life. They care about human, they just want you to live.
That is as much as they care. The fact that they want you to live, then every other thing about
your life, your responsibility for yourself, your responsibility for whatever suffering you're going
through, they just want you to live to deny you the right to be able to take your life because
it's the subject of death in itself is a taboo subject. And of course, this is a religious
argument. So it's people who, in my own view, I do not really take too seriously. So I don't
know if you've touched on all of this. Yeah, I think we still have a question. We have a couple
to go. Let's say a couple to go, but I just want to add that again, again, again, the argument
is not that this thing should be allowed in every single case. The argument is that there are certain
cases where it should be allowed. You understand? That is why the question you asked at the beginning
of the episode is a very important one. Is it ever morally permissible? Is it ever morally permissible?
So the opponents are arguing that it is never. They are saying under no circumstances, like,
they have a stronger bar, actually, but their arguments do not justify that bar.
Here, why the advocates are saying, actually, for reasons such as the way we will write to life,
reasons such as we write to die, reasons such as compassion, actually, there can be some cases
where it makes reasonable sense. So that is what we're content with, if you're an opponent of
Assisted Society and military initiative. And so far, I've not been able to come across any
argument that suggests that there can be no cases where this is morally permissible or
whereby we can say we should not legalize it. So there is another argument that they
normally put forward, and that is the argument that if it is legalized, it is going to lead to
instances of abuse. It's something to consider. But ultimately, the solution is to make sure that
we have guardrails. In Canada, for example, I think you need the signature of two independent doctors.
Yet there are processes, not something people are giving on a receiver plaka. There are actually
processes that you have to go through. So we can make these guardrails and we can be able to avoid
all those concerns. And another thing is this about the sleep-wrestling argument here is that
opponents of Assisted Society and the military, they normally bring up the sleep-wrestling
as if the sleep-wrestling in itself, as if once you say sleep-wrestling, then you've won the debate.
No, when you say sleep-wrestling, what exactly do you mean by sleep-wrestling?
Because there are several ways that I can think of something being sleep-wrestling.
Let's use apartheid, South Africa as an example. Where there was discrimination against blacks,
right? And we used to, they had segregation in public spaces.
They would have, this is black, this is black only and trans, this is white only and trans.
Those kind of things, those kind of symmetry qualities. Now imagine, let's say we are fighting
against apartheid during that era. And we start advocating that no, this segregation has to stop,
that we should allow both whites and blacks to be, that blacks should be able to make use of these
spaces, you understand? And then, let's say the somebody who is in support of the apartheid now
comes off and says, if we allow this, then there's going to be a sleeping slope. Which means if we
allow blacks and whites to be making use of the same entrances now, this is going to lead to a
future whereby all discriminatory practices become abolished. So we should not, we should not do it.
And I'm like, okay, okay, that's, you can say that's the sleep-wrestling. Because normally we
know that all revolutions or progressive movements, they begin somewhere, you have to start from
somewhere, right? Even before the abolition of slavery, there was people who started
by abolition for slaves to have starting rights. So there is normally, it doesn't just happen in
a day. That is the thing about progressive changes. In other words, what I'm saying is that, as you
can see from the case of this analogy, this apartheid analogy, what I'm saying is that
it's not enough to just say there is going to be a sleep-wrestling. You have to also show
that the sleep-wrestling, whatever you are referring to as a sleep-wrestling, it is
something that is undesirable, you understand? You get what I'm saying? So you cannot just expect
yeah. So the apartheid differing that who was saying in the future, if we allow Blacks to be
making use of the same interests at white, in the future, this is good. It's like, yes, that's
actually good. You are saying it as if actually it is something that is bad. So that is one thing
I want to point out, because usually when they make the sleep-wrestling argument, yes, I'm sorry,
they will be saying things like, okay, if we allow it to people with terminal illnesses,
like very soon it will go to a point where people will not start, no, if we allow it to people
with physical suffering, very soon it will not get a place where we allow it to people with mental
suffering. And I'm like, okay, so why do you think, what make you think that physical suffering is
any mental suffering is any better than physical suffering? You understand what I'm saying?
In a certain sense, mental suffering can actually be worse than physical suffering.
What exactly, it's not enough to say that it's going to lead to some other instances. You have
to show that those instances that you have in mind are instances whereby we can say, no,
this instance is not something that we should desire. And then if you come up with one and I
will tell you, fine, I also will not want it. I also do not want it to come to this undesirable
situation. That is why I'm advocating for there to be guardrails, you understand? But if you are
saying that it is going to lead to another instance that is actually undesirable, then you're not
really making an argument against the police. Yeah, so I think this
slippery slope argument is kind of deep and more nuanced than we are dissecting.
For instance, there's a story I came across, a woman, middle-aged woman, who had a mother,
a mother who was in her nineties. Her mom was going through immense suffering and it was
the doctor's idea. In these countries, the doctor can suggest to you that
euthanasia or assisted societies is legal in this country. It's an option for you in case
you want to end it or you're done. And the woman didn't want it. And the doctor was kind of insisting
that it's just an option to even suggest it. Some people think that is an immoral thing for
your doctor to suggest it. And the person who thought that the most was a daughter of this woman
who resisted it. And I think something happened and they proceeded with it. And then in the
Netherlands, it goes through to doctors. The first doctor ascertains the condition and then
it goes through to the second doctor who is going to ascertain it. If the second one
okays it, then they go ahead with the procedure. But if the second one kicks against it, then
they don't. So the second one kicks against it. And later she was saying, kind of like
testifying that if the second doctor had okayed it, then she would have lost her mom. But
the argument was made that this woman has lived a full life. She's like 95 and it's okay if she
dies now. She says, no, I don't want to lose my mom now. Let her die when she is supposed to die
or whatever that means. But when the death comes naturally, then she can die. You see, it's kind
of a nuanced part of the argument. So yeah, you want to say something about that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. Now it's the case that you've just astrayed. Now what we have here
is a clear case of abuse. Yeah. Yeah. And it is also is one of the argument problems here.
And that opponents also bring up that this thing can be abused. So yeah, so it's a very good,
it's actually a very good picture to be to waste. I'm not talking about the server.
But what I would say to that is that in such a case, by, there's been a,
this has been established that this doctor has actually abused this policy. Then in that case,
there should be avenues for people or families to, to fight cases against such.
Yeah, to take it up to your job for you. Yeah, you can take it up legally. Thankfully,
thankfully, because of the car drill that was put in place, that case didn't go through. You
understand? So it's not like we are, it's not like we as when advocates are saying no, that there
are no, there is no chance that people can abuse this. No, that's not what you're saying. Of course,
there are going to be people who are going to abuse it, just as there are people who abuse
almost everything that we have. That is, that is life for you. We have, for example, for example,
we have cars, we make cars, we make cars, people drive cars, people abuse it all the time.
People overspeed, people drink under the influence, like, like people do, and people,
people also die as a result of these abuses, right? What does that now, does it not justify
someone coming and saying, okay, we should, we should ban cars because of the abuses? No, it
doesn't. That this is something about abuse is that we have to work, we have to work to make
sure that we reduce it as much as possible, we reduce it. But to say that because of abuse,
yeah, that, that is the thing, abuse itself cannot, like, but if we start saying that we should be
banning things because of abuse, or it should not happen because of abuse, then so many things,
like, so many things are going to go wrong. Because since we ban those things, then it's
going to make people's life, it's going to make people's life harder. And in the case of assisted
suicide, if you ban it because of the instance of abuse, then what about the legitimate people
who need it, who are actually, who are actually, who are actually suffering, the old people who
need to stand? So that is the, that is the, it is a good, it's a good constitution, it's a good
issue to raise. But again, it doesn't justify outright ban on taxes. Of course it doesn't.
Yeah, like you said, guardrails are the advisable checks that can be put in place. Take, take this
other story. This is the story I read. He was about a man who, who, who had dementia. So you
know, you know how dementia is, it gets progressively worse. So he made a deal with his
doctor. He signed an agreement because you have to sign a legal document that he said,
if it gets to the point where he, he has lost all cognitive faculties that the doctor should
take his life. That was the agreement. And he signed it. So now the doctor is obligated by
law to carry out that, that assignment, whether or not this man changes his mind in the future.
So opponents of this, the argument say somebody might make this agreement initially and then
change their mind later. So okay, yes, what happened later, which kind of like suggested that the
man changed his mind was when the man was administering the dose, the patient was resisting it.
You see, that is, that is a confusing thing. You signed, so he puts the doctor in a very
confused position like, okay, this is already, I have to do this because you've already signed this,
you know, so I'm obligated to do this. But now you're actively resisting this. So what do I do?
So he carried on with the, with the procedure. So yeah, so this is, this is a, this is a,
this is a very strange case for so many reasons. First of all, I'm not familiar with any country
where they have a policy that the doctor and the patient will sign a contract that
the team must be done. Yeah, in Holland, that's, that's what, that's what,
there are extreme cases like that in Holland, in the Netherlands.
You remember, remember you said, you said this person was actually fine. He was fine.
And he then went to the doctor and they signed that when he gets to this certain, certain point.
Yeah, he had dementia. He had dementia because his dementia was, was getting progressively worse.
So he said he would not like to live his life if people around him can not understand him.
And if he, he himself doesn't understand what's going on around him,
if he has lost his mental faculties, then the doctor should carry on with the procedure.
And that's what happened eventually. But when the doctor was administering it,
he was resisting it. Meaning he did not want it at that very moment, even though he had
signed it, the, the agreement with the doctor initially to, to do it. So that is the kind of.
Okay, I'm, I'm going to, I'm going to like to, maybe you send me a link to these kids because
it is, it is, I'm not, this is not how I, how I think this thing works, from what I,
from what I've read about it, because you, now you're saying,
Well, you can actually, you can actually agree beforehand with the doctor what happened,
what the doctor should do in, in Netherlands. You can agree with the doctor should do in the future
if anything happens, you know. Yeah, but even, even where there is an agreement,
you can, you can actually change your mind. So that is why this case either has to be,
it either has to be, either also qualify as a case of abuse or otherwise, if you just,
yeah, otherwise if you're saying that this is, that's according to the, to the national zone,
national policy, once you say you cannot change your mind, that is very strange.
And I will not sign up to that. Yeah, yeah, that is a problem. But then.
So are you saying that it is a national policy or it is a case of abuse?
It's, it's, it's, it's, it's with them, the right of, of, of individuals in, in Netherlands to
agree with the doctor, sign it, something. But the thing is, this person was changed their mind.
They can, they can change their mind if, if they, they have the ability to. This person was resisting
it. It's, it's not clear if, whether they were resisting it because they wanted to change their
mind, because at that point they had lost their mental faculty. They were not thinking,
they were in a vegetative state, you know. So how do you, how do you handle social?
How is it resisting in a vegetative state? That is the thing. That is the confusion.
It's one of the problems. This case is not, case is not really.
Anyway, it's an edge case. It's an edge case. It's a rare one anyway. But it's not quite common.
But there, there has been instances of abuse in countries like
Holland where even people are coming out to say, this is,
doctors are just killing people indiscriminately. And it needs to stop.
There are people who are saying it has gone too far, especially in countries like Canada and
Netherlands, where they say it has gone too far. And of course, it is the opponent.
It is the opponent who are making this argument. But then it, I don't think it's
intuitive to completely dismiss the arguments that they make, especially with the slippery slope.
Because it's very nuanced and very deep.
Oh, I also don't think we should dismiss them. That is why I'm taking it as a discussion.
I address each and every one of them. I don't want to come across as if I'm dismissing any
of these arguments. Yeah.
Standard is why I'm actually taking time to go through all of them.
Like I've said, when it comes to abuse of these things, what we should do is to
put spaces in place to, to prevent abuse. Just to tell you, yeah, even if not,
because it is very difficult to eliminate abuse.
Eventually, every sector, like I don't, I don't think like, I don't know if it's going to be
possible because people, there are people who are still going to do. The only thing is that we're
talking about instances of abuse, if it becomes legal. But do you know that even in jurisdictions
where it is illegal, there are still cases of abuse?
Yes. Yes, of course.
Yeah. And there are cases of doctors actually in places where, where these things are
illegal. There have been cases of doctors who have been found to have, to have done,
done something, killed their, killed their patients. That's right.
That's right.
The famous case or in, I think it was in the rightest, is it the United States or in Great
Day, one of them? It was a famous case of a doctor. I can't remember his name right now.
This shepherd, something shepherd that he was convicted of, this is a local timing that was
committed of killing his elderly patients, right? Some people were, people were not able to
suspect because, you know, these are elderly people now. It's very easy for elderly people to
die. Some people couldn't suspect while he was just killing them. So abuse can happen whether,
whether or not it is legalized or not. Regardless, regardless, as I say, it is something that
should be taken seriously and measures should be in place to prevent as much abuse as possible.
What I don't think is justified is to say that it should be categorically banned or not
legalized. Of course.
On the basis that some, that was extreme using. Yeah, it's extreme.
So those are, those are the main arguments for and against the position. Ultimately,
people are going to have to evaluate the arguments and decide, but it is very important
that wherever you, wherever you stand on the issue, if you're going to argue or
need something, you should be able to come up with arguments that can caught up.
So you cannot just, for example, say, oh, I am against this because of my religion or I
believe in God or whatever. And then you say that, okay, fine, good for you. You don't,
nobody is saying you have to do it. You understand?
Yeah.
It is like, you can, you are actually free to not do this thing. You understand?
If in societies, in liberal democracies, where this thing is legalized, you are not
forced to partake in it. Yeah.
It is for people who want to. Yeah.
So you can have your beliefs and everything. You can view it as immorality, like no problem.
But when you now start saying that everybody also has to abide by your own needs and everybody
has to, people who are suffering, who want this relief, they cannot get it because of your own.
Like, it doesn't, it doesn't, it doesn't make any sense to me. It's not fair to me.
You get, and that is the, this thing is asymmetrical. In societies where it is illegal,
you cannot, you cannot avail yourself to these services. You cannot get it. You can be suffering
unbearably because it is illegal where you are, where you are living. You just keep on suffering.
You cannot really, you suffer until you die.
Anyway, it doesn't really stop. It doesn't really stop. Yeah. So just to add to what you're
saying that the countries, the top 10 countries with the highest suicide rates are not countries
that have Indonesia laws. So it doesn't stop them from taking their lives. People who want to
take their lives, they go ahead to take their lives. But there's something about the state,
the state endorsing it, that kind of makes it, you know, you just do it because there's a, there's
a ease that people feel that they can just do it, you know, because the state has okayed it
because in this, it's in the law, you're allowed legally to be able to do it.
Because if you look at the top 10 countries with the highest suicide rates, these are not,
they are not Indonesia countries. So I'm just, just to add to your point, what you were saying,
like people should not be, it comes down to personal choice because even in, even in countries
that have Indonesia laws, there are still people who do it, the traditional way, who just take
their lives when, when they feel like they're tired, if they are going through any medical,
any psychiatric issues or mental health problems or physical health problems. So even, even in
countries like Netherlands with, with the robust laws on Indonesia, and I said that,
you still have people who are going through the orthodox route to do it.
Yeah, I'll say two things, I'll say two things to that. And the first is that, yeah, you're right,
whether or not the Indonesia or assisted suicide is legalized,
people are still going to suicide. So, yeah, so that is the, that is the first thing. But at the
same time, we can't, we can't say, okay, because people are able to suicide. Therefore, we should,
we should not make assisted suicide legal. And this is actually one thing that some people
bring up, not to study that there are some countries where even suicide is still considered
illegal, believe it or not. Yeah, yeah, including I think even in Nigeria. Yes, it's illegal in
Nigeria. Yeah, so, but let's, let's say in societies like the illegal democracy is the
worst, where society is not illegal. So some people will say, okay, society is not illegal,
you are free to call this side if you want. So why do you, why do we need to have this other layer
of having professionals coming in? And the response I have to that is,
why, okay, why do we have, why do we go to hospitals? Why do we see doctors at all? I mean,
we, we normally treat ourselves. If we get injured, let's say you're playing football,
you get injured, you get, you go to the hospital, you get spirits, a plaster, or you're having a
headache, you go, you go to the chemist, you buy a drug, you get, we actually treat ourselves.
But that does not mean that when we have like serious, like more serious illnesses that we,
we, we can't be able to get other access to doctors. No, we can't say that just because we
can treat ourselves in some situations, that means in all situations, chemists, we, we don't
have right to go to doctors for the month or treatment for them. No, the reason is because
if you stop people from being able to assess doctors in that case, then what we are going to
have is that people are not going to be qualified. You may be able to, you may be able to treat a
cause, but you, you're not qualified to treat a more, a more serious illness, right? And if you
don't allow people that access, people are going to end up being worse off. You understand?
Similarly, in the case of assisted suicide, yeah, people, some people are able to treat
themselves, not all people, by the way, some people are able to, but even, even then, you know
what it takes. First of all, the chances of you botching it are significant. And if you
bought it, you know what that means. It means your life can even go even worse than it already,
than it was. You understand? You get. So, so you're going to have, it's going to be much worse
for you if you attempt it and you don't treat properly. And the way that you are doing it,
like, it is going to be likely to be gruesome. And like, why do we have to go through that
mean? We have professionals who can like just give you like a few quick, easy, you can actually
plan for it. So the very fact that people can kill themselves does not mean that there can be no
reason to have doctor assistance to start. That is the one thing. Then you also said something
about government, that there is something about government coming in or legalizing it.
Yeah, that makes people, people so comfortable. Okay, fine. But there are many places where
abortion is legal, right? They found that government makes something legal doesn't mean that
government is saying, they're saying you should do it or you should not do it. No, they're just
making it the option there for people that want to do it. Yeah, but then they're not just people
to do it. Yeah, that's the thing. That is the argument they are making that it kind of like
encourages people to go that route. But at the end of the day, it's still there. It's still,
whether it encourages people or not, it's still their choice to make at the end of the day. But
the argument is that would these people not be encouraged if this law wasn't there, you know?
But then the problem I have with the argument is that it's overly moralistic because it comes
from the position of care, like you care so much about people. You care as much as, as, as long
as you want them to leave, but you don't care as much as you should in terms of the quality of
solving their problems. Yeah, it's about the quality of their lives. Yeah, that is the problem.
That is, that is what I describe as masochistic paternalism. You're not the one, you're not in
their shoes. You're not, you're not the one suffering. That is the thing. Imagine what it would
take for somebody to say, okay, I've had it. I can no longer be a this. Imagine what it would take.
Naturally, we are programmed to preserve our lives. Like that is the, that is the default. People
have to, it is, it is, it is instinctive something. It's not something we think about. The default
is that we want to preserve our life as long as possible. That is the human default. We also cannot
deny that due to the reality of what the world, what the living is like, but we cannot deny that
that same life can get to a point whereby it becomes so bad that even death becomes preferable.
But there are cases where it's not even that bad. There are cases where it's not even half as bad.
Like, like one incident that happened in Canada where a woman who had chemical sensitivities
approved for MAID, a medical, medical, medical line, after struggling to find accessible housing.
So she could not find accessible housing. She was so frustrated by, by the experience of looking for,
for accessible housing that she went to seek for MAID, you know. So some people are saying,
if the law wasn't there, maybe she would not, maybe she would persevere. And again, you can,
you can, you can make the argument that it's at the end of the day.
How do you know that she wouldn't go? How do you know that she wouldn't just go and
try to do it, do it herself and then maybe end up becoming a paraplegic or something?
Yeah, but the question is that are we a society thing on, on, on, on giving people a pathway
to the other side of, of, of, of life or are they trying to solve their problems?
The problems that she had was that she was, she had chemical sensitivities and she was
looking for accessible housing for a special condition, you know, which is which some people
will say it's not so bad. I mean, you're looking for a house and you couldn't find it. So the
frustration led you to go and do what you did. Some people, some, some people use poverty,
some people use poverty also. Poverty has a reason to, to assist, to, to seek
MDID. So, so the question is, are these people seeking this option because the state has made
it an option? Or is it because the state has also provided a field to provide adequate, adequate
care? Because it seems like the state took a stance that instead of providing adequate, adequate
care for, for people, they are giving them an option to just kill themselves.
Of course, that is wrong. See, that is the thing. See, these things are not mutually exclusive.
You either have to provide, provide, provide a good welfare system, either that or you have to,
you have to provide assisted suicide. You have to make it available. No, you can actually do boats.
The state has a, the state has a duty to actually try to make the life of cities in less
bad, you understand? That is part of the job of the state. You get, so then we can do boats.
And if, if it is a situation whereby, maybe in that case, we can say, okay, the state failed
that individual because they didn't provide this, this other option. So we can actually criticize
that it is, it makes sense. But you cannot say, okay, because of that, that it is because the
state created this other avenue, you understand? So if, if, if the state had done that job, and
this is, this, this argument is one that is another one that is, it normally comes up when
people talk about palliative care, you see? Instead of, instead of making assisted suicide
bigger, well, let's focus on palliative care and, and then people will not go for assisted
suicide. And I'm like, okay, fine. Of course you should focus on palliative care. Of course,
it is really important that we get people that option also, that we should be able to,
option to be able to like, you know, go for ways to alleviate their suffering and take care of them.
It's really doing the old age and all that. This is also one thing that is very shameful
for our situation in Africa, which is that in most African cultures, we don't have good,
we don't even know if we even have palliative systems. So we don't have it.
A serious government should be able to realize that, yeah, you can actually make the palliative
care option available for people who are going to need it. And you should also have this other
option available for people who are going, because palliative care is not like palliative care.
It's like it is some kind of magic bullet. There are people who are going to be okay with
going through palliative care, you understand? And there are people who are not going to be okay
with being, depending on their condition of being in palliative care. Or there are people who will
be in palliative care for up to time and you get the point like, okay, no, I'm not, I'm not comfortable
living this life. Maybe even if my, maybe this physical pain is being elevated or it's being
reduced in palliative care or whatever. For the same time, maybe their life is just like, has become
like, it deemed their life to be like, maybe they can no longer do anything. You know, there are
certain things, certain things that make people, that can make people decide it's not just matter of
being in pain and all that. Like imagine somebody who, I don't know, maybe you've, you, somebody
is just buried in. Well, you have somebody that has an autoimmune. What is this condition?
Or no, not, I forget to read. This several pansy? Yeah, yeah, it's in that things, in that range.
Basically, they are immobile, you understand? They cannot do anything. Like you basically just
lying here like a, like a vegetable. There are people who, who do not want to be alive in that
state. There are people who look at that and say, no, I would rather, I would rather die now than
just, you understand? So we can do this thing. We can do both. We can get to this oxygen.
Yeah, I think your argument, your argument is rational. And the argument that we have, we have,
we have both made is rational in extreme cases, which was the original plan. The original plan
was for unbearable suffering. People who were, who were going through unbearable suffering where the,
there was no chance that their condition would improve. And it was only
retrogressing or regressing. So that was the option. So the, the addition of categories,
so the expansion of categories is when they start adding other categories,
like psychiatric conditions and mental illness, and then to even people who are feeling tired,
like this issue I just raised. Anyway, like we said, you know, it comes down to
personal choice. People should be allowed to do whatever they want to do. But I think the middle
worry has been economic reasons. And because of course, as we know, in Western countries,
birth rates are falling. And in, in the last year or so, between last year and the year before,
the last one, 5% of all deaths in a game in the Netherlands was euthanasia and assisted
suicide. So it's, it's, it's kind of like a cause for public concern that people are
taking their own lives and it's affecting the economy of the, of the country. So I think
that's legitimate concern, you know, for people who are concerned about that, who
think about the economy because anything that affects the economy affects everybody,
not just the people who are involved. So yeah, I don't know if you have anything to say to that.
I think it is, it is reasonable to, to, like I said, you should, you should,
um, it's probably controversial things, things that are very important that we should stress,
test them to see, um, if they hold up. So yeah, I, I get the concerns or at the same time,
I don't think any of the concerns is to me justified kind of blanket ban on.
No, no, there's no, no, there's not a blanket ban. Yeah. I'm not, of course we are not,
we are not in favor of a blanket ban, but there are people who are eating out of that.
Yeah, yeah. The openness. The openness, yeah. I'm not talking about, I'm not talking about you
specifically, I'm talking about the people who want to make that claim. So yeah, we should do
everything we can to like make people's life better. And at the same time, we should also,
I think we should also have this thing available for people who just, um, who don't, who are not
in that category. And one final thing I should say again is, uh, because this is the, this is an
episode that we've talked about, yeah, to talk about suicide and everything. One thing that
should matter is that this is not advocacy or encouragement for people to commit suicide.
This is not what we are doing here. Suicide is a tragic thing that should not be taken lightly.
So it is just, we are talking about certain situations and we have to be honest about
these things. It is, it can be true that, be true that, be true that people, there are some people
who mistakenly think that their life is not, maybe they should go and keep their safe and
that's okay, this is what we made true. And another thing, also be true that there are people who
come to a rational and justifiable conclusion that their life is no longer work-living,
understand? So we should also, um, I think that's, that's, that's the final thing I have to say on this.
Okay, yeah. So I think what I, what I ask what you said is that it's kind of a cultural thing
where you have cultures where speaking about death is, is normalized, you know, it's like,
like in these liberal countries that we mentioned, these are countries where people speak freely
about death. There is no screaming, no scrimmage-ness about death, about the subject of death.
People are not, you know, recoiling when they hear these subjects. They engage freely with it
because they've embraced it as, as part of life because it's part of life, death's part of life.
And, and in this part, you know, in Africa and in less liberal countries, conservative countries,
it is not, it's kind of like a taboo. People are so scared of it and it's kind of like an irrational
fear because it's something that is part of life again. And most people are not comfortably
discussing it. So in these cultures, it's going to be very difficult, even in the near future,
for these laws to spread. So yeah, it's, that's what I just wanted to add to it.
Yeah, I think we should wrap it up now. It's been, it's been, it's been challenging at times,
but I think it's, the conversation has been worth it because I think this is something that is
affecting, that is affecting lots of people. The absence of these services is, they've made so
many unnecessarily suffering to, to persist unnecessarily. And I think it's something that
at the very least, just as they are currently doing in the UK, at the very least,
sensible states or governments should, at least they should be having that debate.
It's been a great pleasure. See you next time.
Yeah, same year. much, much, much pleasure. Next time.
